Part 2 serial IO lesson (#88)
gbdev/gb-asm-tutorial: src/part2/serial-link.md

# Serial Link

---

**TODO:** In this lesson...
- learn how to control the Game Boy serial port from code
- build a wrapper over the low-level serial port interface
- implement high-level features to enable reliable data transfers

---

## Running the code

Testing the code in this lesson (or any code that uses the serial port) is a bit more complicated than what we've been doing so far.
There's a few things to be aware of.

> You need an emulator that supports the serial port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need an emulator that supports the serial port, such as:
```

:::tip Information overload

This section is intended as a reasonably complete description of the Game Boy serial port, from a programming perspective.
There's a lot of information packed in here and you don't need to absorb it all to continue.

:::

Communication via the serial port is organised as discrete data transfers of one byte each.
Data transfer is bidirectional, with every bit of data written out matched by one read in.
A data transfer can therefore be thought of as *swapping* the data byte in one device's buffer for the byte in the other's.

The serial port is *idle* by default.
Idle time is used to read received data, configure the port if needed, and load the next value to send.

Before we can transfer any data, we need to configure the *clock source* of both Game Boys.
To synchronise the two devices, one Game Boy must provide the clock signal that both will use.
Setting bit 0 of the **Serial Control** register (`SC`) enables the Game Boy's *internal* serial clock, and makes it the clock provider.
The other Game Boy must have its clock source set to *external* (`SC` bit 0 cleared).
The externally clocked Game Boy will receive the clock signal via the link cable.

> Before a transfer, the data to transmit is loaded into the **Serial Buffer** register (`SB`).

Reviewer: SB can link to https://gbdev.io/pandocs/Serial_Data_Transfer_(Link_Cable).html#ff01--sb-serial-transfer-data

After 8 pulses (*8 bits!*) the transfer is complete -- the serial port deactivates itself, and the serial interrupt is requested.
Normal execution continues while the serial port is active: the transfer will be performed independently of the program code.

## Sio

Alright, let's write some code!
**Sio** is the **S**erial **i**nput/**o**utput module and we're going to build it in its own file, so open a new file called `sio.asm`.

At the top of `sio.asm`, include `hardware.inc` and then define a set of constants that represent Sio's main states:

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-status-enum}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-status-enum}}
```

Sio operates as a finite state machine with each of these constants being a unique state.
Sio's job is to manage serial transfers, so Sio's state simultaneously indicates what Sio is doing and the current transfer status.

:::tip EXPORT quality

`EXPORT` makes the variables following it available in other source files.
In general, there are better ways to do this -- it shouldn't be your first choice.

> The reason `EXPORT` is used in this lesson is to avoid adding (even more) fiddly bits to the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EXPORT` is used here for simplicity, so we can stay focused on the concept being taught.
```

:::

Below the constants, add a new WRAM section with some variables for Sio's state:

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-state}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-state}}
```

`wSioState` holds one of the state constants we defined above.
The other variables will be discussed as we build the features that use them.

Add a new code section and an initialisation routine:

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-impl-init}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-impl-init}}
    ret
```

### Buffers
The buffers are a pair of temporary storage locations for all messages sent or received by Sio.
There's a buffer for data to transmit (Tx) and one for receiving data (Rx).
The variable `wSioBufferOffset` holds the current location within *both* data buffers -- Game Boy serial transfers are always symmetrical.

> First we'll need a couple of constants, so add these below the existing constants, near the top of the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First we'll need a couple of constants, so add these below the existing ones, near the top of the file.
```

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-buffer-defs}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-buffer-defs}}
```

Allocate the buffers, each in their own section, just above the `SioCore State` section we made earlier.
This needs to be specified carefully and uses some unfamiliar syntax, so you might like to copy and paste this code:

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-buffers}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-buffers}}
```

`ALIGN[8]` causes each section -- and each buffer -- to start at an address with a low byte of zero.
This makes building a pointer to the buffer element at index `i` trivial, as the high byte of the pointer is constant for the entire buffer, and the low byte is simply `i`.
The result is a significant reduction in the amount of work required to access the data and manipulate offsets of both buffers.

> :::tip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip Aligning Sections
```

If you would like to learn more about aligning sections -- *which is by no means required to continue this lesson* -- the place to start is the [SECTIONS](https://rgbds.gbdev.io/docs/rgbasm.5#SECTIONS) section in the rgbasm language documenation.

:::

At the end of `SioReset`, clear the buffers:

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-reset-buffers}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-reset-buffers}}
```

### Core implementation
Below `SioInit`, add a function to start a multibyte transfer of the entire data buffer:

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-start-transfer}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-start-transfer}}
```

To initialise the transfer, start from buffer offset zero, set the transfer count, and switch to the `SIO_ACTIVE` state.
The first byte to send is loaded from `wSioBufferTx` before a jump to the next function starts the first transfer immediately.

<!-- PortStart -->

> Activating the serial port is a simple matter of setting bit 7 of `rSC`, but we need to do a couple of other things at the same time, so add a function to bundle it all together:

Reviewer 2: All MMIO register names in `hardware.inc` are prefixed with `r` to distinguish them from ROM, SRAM, WRAM, and HRAM labels. See "[ASM style guide](https://gbdev.io/guides/asmstyle.html)".

> Activating the serial port is a simple matter of setting bit 7 of `rSC`, but we need to do a couple of other things at the same time, so add a function to bundle it all together:

Reviewer: @pinobatch thanks Pino. It's just that in other parts of the document it's called `SC`, so seeing it as `rSC` after a point may be confusing, so I'd suggest sticking to one name

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-port-start}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-port-start}}
```

The first thing `SioPortStart` does is something called the "catchup delay", but only if the internal clock source is enabled.

:::tip Delay? Why?

When a Game Boy serial port is active, it will transfer a data bit whenever it detects clock pulse.
When using the external clock source, the active serial port will wait indefinitely -- until the externally provided clock signal is received.
But when using the internal clock source, bits will start getting transferred as soon as the port is activated.
Because the internally clocked device can't wait once activated, the catchup delay is used to ensure the externally clocked device activates its port first.

:::

> To check if the internal clock is enabled, read the serial port control register (`rSC`) and check if the clock source bit is set.

Reviewer: Same comment as previous, regarding `rSC`.

```

<!-- Tick -->
Implement the timeout logic in `SioTick`:

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-tick}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-tick}}
```

`SioTick` checks the current state (`wSioState`) and jumps to a state-specific subroutine (labelled `*_tick`).

**`SIO_ACTIVE`:** a transfer has been started, if the clock source is *external*, update the timeout timer.

The timer's state is an unsigned integer stored in `wSioTimer`.
Check that the timer is active (has a non-zero value) with `and a, a`.
Decrement the timer and write the new value back to memory.
If the timer expired (the new value is zero) the transfer should be aborted.
The `dec` instruction sets the zero flag in that case, so all we have to do is `jr z, SioAbort`.

**`SIO_RESET`:** `SioReset` has been called, change state to `SIO_IDLE`.
This causes a one tick delay after `SioReset` is called.

<!-- Abort -->
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-abort}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-abort}}
```

`SioAbort` brings the serial port down and sets the current state to `SIO_FAILED`.

> The aborted transfer state is intentionally left intact (or as intact as it was, at least) so it can be used to inform error handling and debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aborted transfer state is intentionally left intact so it can be used to instruct error handling and aid debugging.
```

- If the values match, the packet is intact.

<!-- Link/protocol -->
With the packet integrity checksum, the receiving end can detect packet data corruption and discard packets that don't pass the test.
When a packet is not delivered successfully, it should be transmitted again by the sender.
Unfortunately, the sender has no idea if the packet it sent was delivered intact.

To keep the sender in the loop, and manage retransmission, we need a *protocol* -- a set of rules that govern communication.
The protocol follows the principle:
> The sender of a packet will assume the transfer failed, *unless the receiver reports success*.

Let's define two classes of packet:
- **Application Messages:** critical data that must be delivered, retransmit if delivery failed
    - contains application-specific data
- **Protocol Metadata:** do not retransmit (always send the latest state)
    - contains link state information (including last packet received)

:::tip Corruption? In my Game Boy?

Yep, there's any number of possible causes of transfer data replication errors when working with the Game Boy serial port.

> Some examples include: old or damaged hardware, luck, cosmic interference, and user actions (hostile and accidental).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some examples include: old or damaged hardware, luck, [cosmic rays](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-event_upset), and user actions (hostile and accidental).
```

```

- Call `SioPacketChecksum` to calculate the packet checksum.
    - It's important that the value of the checksum field is zero when performing this initial checksum calculation.
- Write the correct checksum to the packet header.
- Start the transfer.

Implement the packet integrity test for received packets:

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-packet-check}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-packet-check}}
```

- Check that the packet begins with the magic number `SIO_PACKET_START`.
- Calculate the checksum of the received data.
    - This includes the packet checksum calculated by the sender.
    - The result of this calculation will be zero if the data is the same as it was when sent.

Finally, implement the checksum:

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-checksum}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/serial-link/sio.asm:sio-checksum}}
```

- start with the size of the buffer (effectively -1 for each byte summed)
- subtract each byte in the buffer from the sum

:::tip

The checksum implemented here has been kept very simple for this tutorial.

> It's probably worth looking into better solutions for real-world projects.

Reviewer: Do we know some alternatives we can suggest?
